src/analysis/business-process.md, before:

# Business process model

In this section, being a part of the problem analysis, I shall formalize abstract needs of the users in form of a business process model, which will serve as a bridge to specifying system requirements.

As stated before, the system at hand has potential to be far more than a documentation platform.
For the discussion of user's needs and preferences, the mentioned referential application shall be used throughout the thesis.

In the scenarios I assume a part of development team is working on a user manual for their software product.
The team consists of:

* the head of the department, who takes care of project management of the user manual development,
* several developers, who are familiar with their software module and write manual for their code,
* a reviewer, who fixes typos, grammar, stylistics etc. and
* a publisher who takes the source codes and produces the final manual for DTP and print purposes.

The department is using markdown, since all developers who are writing the most of the texts are familiar with it and use it efficiently.

## Release

\begin{sidewaysfigure}[!htbp]\centering
	\includegraphics[width=0.85\textwidth]{./src/assets/diagram/bp-release}
	\caption{Business process model: Release}\label{fig:bp:release}
\end{sidewaysfigure}

In diagram \ref{fig:bp:release}, there is a possible scenario of the department's workflow on updating user manual after software release.
The head of the department orchestrates the team to start working on manual for new version.
Two developers keep updating the manual pages, each for their module.
Pages are reviewed by the reviewer.
When they are satisfied with the text, it is submitted to publisher, who will bundle the pages and create a single readable and printable document, which is submitted back to the head of the department.

Here we can make few reasonable observations:

* If a logical mistake appeared in the final product, the head would like to know who made it.
The same way a source code can be reviewed and individual lines annotated, with revision ID, date and author.
VCS and revision updates are required.
* Publisher needs direct access to the files.
* First developer only writes in pages regarding module A, second for module B. Publisher only needs read access to the files. Some mistakes could be avoided if the VCS repository could be divided into namespaces and edited separately with access control.

## Hotfix

\begin{sidewaysfigure}[!htbp]\centering
	\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{./src/assets/diagram/bp-hotfix}
	\caption{Business process model: Hotfix}\label{fig:bp:hotfix}
\end{sidewaysfigure}

The diagram \ref{fig:bp:hotfix} showcases department action flow, when hotfix, which requires user manual update, is issued.
The process is very similar, because we are at very high level of abstraction.
The notable difference is however, that multiple maintained versions of the manual need to be accessed and updated individually. Let us form our next observation:
If a hotfix that requires a change in user manual is created, it is demanded to patch previous version of the manual, without introducing changes already applied to current version of the manual.
In the same manner as applying changes to source code. This calls for VCS with parallel branch support.

## Summary

We have come to few solid conclusions through business process model.

1. The system needs underlaying VCS with branching feature, as pointed out by several observations. Possibly distributed, so participants can make contributions when out of office.
2. The system needs to provide direct access to files for at least read permission for publisher.
3. It should provide direct access to files for revision updates as well, since developers like to work in their own environment most of the time, at their personalized workstations.
4. It should provide simple read/write interface with no setup required for the reviewer or head of the department, who both like to preview pages in a friendlier form than markdown source.
5. The system could profit from some sort of in-repository access control, to prevent unintended revisions.

Commit message:

Fix chapters 1-2 based on suggestions from smoliji

src/analysis/business-process.md, after:

# Business process model

In this section, being a part of the problem analysis, I shall formalize abstract needs of the users in form of a business process model, which will serve as a bridge to specifying system requirements.

As stated before, the system at hand has potential to be far more than a documentation platform.
For the discussion of user's needs and preferences, the mentioned referential application shall be used throughout the thesis.

Here in bussiness process model, I shall describe the workflow of a company using the system.
While taking a very specific direction, the example case is convenient for two main reasons:

1. it portraits usage of the system by software developers, who are example of _technically oriented users_, as stated in the thesis instructions,
2. it is elaborate enough to demonstrate several user types with different needs and expectations of the system, which helps to model the system and its variability.

In the scenarios I assume a part of development team is working on a user manual for their software product.
The team consists of:

* the head of the department, who takes care of project management of the user manual development,
* several developers, who are familiar with their software module and write manual for their code,
* a reviewer, who fixes typos, grammar, stylistics etc. and
* a publisher who takes the source codes and produces the final manual for DTP and print purposes.

The department is using markdown, since all developers who are writing the most of the texts are familiar with it and use it efficiently.

In the following two subsections I will demonstrate the interactions of the development team with the system from business process perspective.

## Business process scenario: Release

\begin{sidewaysfigure}[!htbp]\centering
	\includegraphics[width=0.85\textwidth]{./src/assets/diagram/bp-release}
	\caption{Business process model: Release}\label{fig:bp:release}
\end{sidewaysfigure}

In diagram \ref{fig:bp:release}, there is a possible scenario of the department's workflow on updating user manual after software release.
The head of the department orchestrates the team to start working on manual for new version.
Two developers keep updating the manual pages, each for their module.
Pages are reviewed by the reviewer.
When they are satisfied with the text, it is submitted to publisher, who will bundle the pages and create a single readable and printable document, which is submitted back to the head of the department.

Here we can make few reasonable observations:

* If a logical mistake appeared in the final product, the head would like to know who made it.
The same way a source code can be reviewed and individual lines annotated, with revision ID, date and author.
VCS and revision updates are required.
* Publisher needs direct access to the files.
* First developer only writes in pages regarding module A, second for module B. Publisher only needs read access to the files. Some mistakes could be avoided if the VCS repository could be divided into namespaces and edited separately with access control.

## Business process scenario: Hotfix

\begin{sidewaysfigure}[!htbp]\centering
	\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{./src/assets/diagram/bp-hotfix}
	\caption{Business process model: Hotfix}\label{fig:bp:hotfix}
\end{sidewaysfigure}

The diagram \ref{fig:bp:hotfix} showcases department action flow, when hotfix, which requires user manual update, is issued.
The process is very similar, because we are at very high level of abstraction.
The notable difference is however, that multiple maintained versions of the manual need to be accessed and updated individually. Let us form our next observation:
If a hotfix that requires a change in user manual is created, it is demanded to patch previous version of the manual, without introducing changes already applied to current version of the manual.
In the same manner as applying changes to source code. This calls for VCS with parallel branch support.

## Summary

We have come to few solid conclusions through business process model.

1. The system needs underlaying VCS with branching feature, as pointed out by several observations. Possibly distributed, so participants can make contributions when out of office.
2. The system needs to provide direct access to files for at least read permission for publisher.
3. It should provide direct access to files for revision updates as well, since developers like to work in their own environment most of the time, at their personalized workstations.
4. It should provide simple read/write interface with no setup required for the reviewer or head of the department, who both like to preview pages in a friendlier form than markdown source.
5. The system could profit from some sort of in-repository access control, to prevent unintended revisions.
